Add local mode to Qiskit Code Assistant Guide (#2275)
Qiskit/documentation: docs/guides/qiskit-code-assistant-local.mdx

---
title: Use Qiskit Code Assistant in local mode
description: Learn how to deploy and use the Qiskit Code Assistant model locally.
---

{/* cspell:ignore ollama, gguf */}

# Use Qiskit Code Assistant in local mode

Learn how to install, configure, and use the Qiskit Code Assistant model on your local machine.

<Admonition type="note" title="Notes">
    - Qiskit Code Assistant is in preview release status and is subject to change.
    - If you have feedback or want to contact the developer team, use the [Qiskit Slack Workspace channel](https://qiskit.enterprise.slack.com/archives/C07LYA6PL83) or the related public GitHub repositories.
</Admonition>

## Download the Qiskit Code Assistant model

The Qiskit Code Assistant model is available in  <DefinitionTooltip definition="GGUF is a binary format that is designed for fast loading and saving of models, and for ease of reading.">GGUF file format</DefinitionTooltip> and can be downloaded from the Hugging Face Hub in one of two ways.

<details>

<summary>Download from the Hugging Face website</summary>

Follow these steps to download the Qiskit Code Assistant GGUF model from the Hugging Face website:

> 1. Navigate to the [`granite-8b-qiskit`](https://huggingface.co/qiskit) model page

Reviewer: we could point to: https://huggingface.co/Qiskit/granite-8b-qiskit-GGUF

Author: thanks @lucaburatti7
https://github.com/Qiskit/documentation/pull/2275/commits/96a03ac1c945e8e3275f1743ee76117f8dbeb04d

1. Select the `granite-8b-qiskit` GGUF model version
1. Go to the Files and Versions tab and download the GGUF model

</details>

<details>

<summary>Download using the Hugging Face CLI</summary>

To download the `granite-8b-qiskit` GGUF model using the Hugging Face CLI, follow these steps:

1. Install the [Hugging Face CLI](https://huggingface.co/docs/huggingface_hub/main/en/guides/cli)
1. Log in to your Hugging Face account

    ```
    huggingface-cli login
    ```

1. Download the `granite-8b-qiskit` GGUF model

    ```
    huggingface-cli download <HF REPO NAME> <GGUF PATH> --local-dir <LOCAL PATH>
    ```

</details>

## Use the Qiskit Code Assistant model

> There are multiple ways to deploy and interact with the downloaded `granite-8b-qiskit` GGUF model. This guide demonstrates using [Ollama](https://ollama.com) as follows: either with the [Ollama application](#using-the-ollama-application), or with the [`llama-cpp-python` package](#using-the-llama-cpp-python-package).

Reviewer: add that ollama is also available with the Hugging Face Hub integration (more details in the comment below)

Author: thanks @lucaburatti7
https://github.com/Qiskit/documentation/pull/2275/commits/96a03ac1c945e8e3275f1743ee76117f8dbeb04d

### Using the Ollama application

The Ollama application provides a simple solution to run the GGUF models locally. It is easy to use, with a CLI that makes the whole setup process, model management, and interaction fairly straightforward. It’s ideal for quick experimentation and for users that want fewer technical details to handle.

#### Install Ollama

1. Download the [Ollama application](https://ollama.com/download)
1. Install the downloaded file
1. Launch the installed Ollama application

    <Admonition type="info">The application is running successfully when the Ollama icon appears in the desktop menu bar. You can also verify the service is running by going to http://localhost:11434/.</Admonition>

1. Try Ollama in your terminal and start running models. For example:

    ```
    ollama run granite3-dense:8b
    ```

> 

Reviewer: #### Using the Ollama/Hugging Face Hub integration

The [Ollama/Hugging Face Hub integration](https://huggingface.co/docs/hub/ollama) provides a way to interact with GGUF models hosted on the Hub without creating a new ```modelfile```.
1. Enable ollama under your [Local Apps settings](https://huggingface.co/settings/local-apps)
2. Go the [`granite-8b-qiskit`](https://huggingface.co/qiskit) GGUF model page, choose ollama from the ```Use this model``` dropdown. 
3. Run ```ollama run hf.co/Qiskit/granite-8b-qiskit-GGUF``` on the terminal

 A default ```template``` and ```params``` files are available by default on Hugging Face together with the GGUF model.

Author: thanks @lucaburatti7
https://github.com/Qiskit/documentation/pull/2275/commits/96a03ac1c945e8e3275f1743ee76117f8dbeb04d

#### Set up Ollama with the Qiskit Code Assistant GGUF model

> 

Reviewer: If you have manually downloaded the GGUF model and you want to experiment with different template and parameters:

Author: thanks @lucaburatti7
https://github.com/Qiskit/documentation/pull/2275/commits/96a03ac1c945e8e3275f1743ee76117f8dbeb04d

1. Create a `Modelfile` entering the following content and be sure to update `<PATH-TO-GGUF-FILE>` to the actual path of your downloaded model.

    ```
    FROM <PATH-TO-GGUF-FILE>

>     TEMPLATE """{{ if .System }}System:

Reviewer: New model file is:
```
FROM <PATH-TO-GGUF-FILE>
TEMPLATE """{{ if .System }}
System:
{{ .System }}

{{ end }}{{ if .Prompt }}Question:
{{ .Prompt }}

{{ end }}Answer:
```python{{ .Response }}
"""

PARAMETER stop "Question:"
PARAMETER stop "Answer:"
PARAMETER stop "System:"
PARAMETER stop "```"

PARAMETER temperature 0
PARAMETER top_k 1
```

Author: thanks @lucaburatti7
https://github.com/Qiskit/documentation/pull/2275/commits/96a03ac1c945e8e3275f1743ee76117f8dbeb04d

<Admonition type="note" title="Notes">
    - Qiskit Code Assistant is in preview release status and is subject to change.
    - If you have feedback or want to contact the developer team, use the [Qiskit Slack Workspace channel](https://qiskit.enterprise.slack.com/archives/C07LYA6PL83) or the related public GitHub repositories.
</Admonition>

## Download the Qiskit Code Assistant model

The Qiskit Code Assistant model is available in  <DefinitionTooltip definition="GGUF is a binary format that is designed for fast loading and saving of models, and for ease of reading.">GGUF file format</DefinitionTooltip> and can be downloaded from the Hugging Face Hub in one of two ways.

<details>

<summary>Download from the Hugging Face website</summary>

Follow these steps to download the Qiskit Code Assistant GGUF model from the Hugging Face website:

1. Navigate to the `granite-8b-qiskit` model page: https://huggingface.co/qiskit
1. Select the `granite-8b-qiskit` GGUF model version
1. Go to the Files and Versions tab and download the GGUF model

</details>

<details>

<summary>Download using the Hugging Face CLI</summary>

> To download the `granite-8b-qiskit` GGUF model using the Hugging Face CLI follow these steps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To download the `granite-8b-qiskit` GGUF model using the Hugging Face CLI, follow these steps:
```

> 1. Install the Hugging Face CLI: https://huggingface.co/docs/huggingface_hub/main/en/guides/cli
> 1. Login to your Hugging Face account

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Install the [Hugging Face CLI](https://huggingface.co/docs/huggingface_hub/main/en/guides/cli)
1. Log in to your Hugging Face account
```

    ```
    huggingface-cli login
    ```

1. Download the `granite-8b-qiskit` GGUF model

    ```
    huggingface-cli download <HF REPO NAME> <GGUF PATH> --local-dir <LOCAL PATH>
    ```

</details>

> ## Get the Qiskit Code Assistant model up and running

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Use the Qiskit Code Assistant model
```

> There are multiple ways to deploy and interact with the downloaded `granite-8b-qiskit` GGUF model. These instructions outline how to get up and running on your local machine using [Ollama](https://ollama.com).
> 
> - [Using the Ollama application](#using-the-ollama-application)
> - [Using the `llama-cpp-python` package](#using-the-llama-cpp-python-package)

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```suggestion
There are multiple ways to deploy and interact with the downloaded `granite-8b-qiskit` GGUF model, using [Ollama](https://ollama.com): either with the [Ollama application](#using-the-ollama-application), or with the [`llama-cpp-python` package](#using-the-llama-cpp-python-package).
```
```

Author: hi @abbycross thanks for the updates/review. what i wanted to say here is that there are multiple ways to run to run the model. Ollama is just one application (there are others like [Jan AI](https://jan.ai/docs), etc.). 
basically, as long as an application supports the GGUF model format that this model can be used. we just happen to choose Ollama for this guide

Reviewer 2: Got it, I understand - so the multiple ways don't just involve the two Ollama options. We can reword to something like:

```suggestion
There are multiple ways to deploy and interact with the downloaded `granite-8b-qiskit` GGUF model. This guide demonstrates using [Ollama](https://ollama.com) as follows: either with the [Ollama application](#using-the-ollama-application), or with the [`llama-cpp-python` package](#using-the-llama-cpp-python-package).
```
Would something like this make more sense?

Author: yes, thank you! i appreciate it.

### Using the Ollama application

> The Ollama application provides a simple solution to run the GGUF models locally. It is easy to use, with a CLI that makes the whole set up process, model management, and interaction fairly straightforward. It’s ideal for quick experimentation and/or for users that want fewer technical details to handle.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Ollama application provides a simple solution to run the GGUF models locally. It is easy to use, with a CLI that makes the whole setup process, model management, and interaction fairly straightforward. It’s ideal for quick experimentation and for users that want fewer technical details to handle.
```

#### Install Ollama

> 1. Download the Ollama application: https://ollama.com/download

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Download the [Ollama application](https://ollama.com/download)
```

1. Install the downloaded file
1. Launch the installed Ollama application

>     <Admonition type="info">Once running, you will see the Ollama icon in the desktop menu bar, indicating that the application is running successfully. You can also verify the service is running by going to http://localhost:11434/.</Admonition>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <Admonition type="info">The application is running successfully when the Ollama icon appears in the desktop menu bar. You can also verify the service is running by going to http://localhost:11434/.</Admonition>
```

1. Try Ollama in your terminal and start running models e.g.,

    ```
    ollama run granite3-dense:8b
    ```

#### Set up Ollama with the Qiskit Code Assistant GGUF model

> 1. Create a `Modelfile` entering the below content and be sure to update `<PATH-TO-GGUF-FILE>` to the actual path of your downloaded model

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create a `Modelfile` entering the following content and be sure to update `<PATH-TO-GGUF-FILE>` to the actual path of your downloaded model.
```

    ```
    FROM <PATH-TO-GGUF-FILE>
    TEMPLATE """{{ if .System }}System:
    {{ .System }}

    {{ end }}
    {{ if .Prompt }}Question:
    {{ .Prompt }}

    {{ end }}
    Answer:
    ```python
    {{ .Response }}
    """

    SYSTEM """"""

    PARAMETER stop "<fim_prefix>"
    PARAMETER stop "<fim_middle>"
    PARAMETER stop "<fim_suffix>"
    PARAMETER stop "<fim_pad>"
    PARAMETER stop "<|endoftext|>"

    PARAMETER mirostat 0
    PARAMETER mirostat_eta 0.1
    PARAMETER mirostat_tau 5.0
    PARAMETER num_ctx 10000
    PARAMETER repeat_penalty 1.0
    PARAMETER temperature 0.8
    PARAMETER seed 0
    PARAMETER tfs_z 1.0
    PARAMETER num_predict 1024
    PARAMETER top_k 50
    PARAMETER top_p 0.95
    PARAMETER min_p 0.05
    ```

> 1. Run the following command to create a custom model instance based on the `Modelfile`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Run the following command to create a custom model instance based on the `Modelfile`.
```

    ```
    ollama create granite-8b-qiskit -f ./path-to-model-file
    ```

>     <Admonition type="note">This process may take some time, Ollama will read the model file, initialize the model instance and configure it according to the specifications provided.</Admonition>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <Admonition type="note">This process may take some time for Ollama to read the model file, initialize the model instance, and configure it according to the specifications provided.</Admonition>
```

#### Run the Qiskit Code Assistant model in Ollama

After the `granite-8b-qiskit` GGUF model has been set up in Ollama, run the following command to launch the model and interact with it in the terminal (in chat mode)

```
ollama run granite-8b-qiskit
```

Some useful commands:

- `ollama list` - List models on your computer
- `ollama rm granite-8b-qiskit` - Remove/delete the model
- `ollama show granite-8b-qiskit` - Show model information

> - `ollama stop granite-8b-qiskit` - Stop a model which is currently running

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
- `ollama stop granite-8b-qiskit` - Stop a model that is currently running
```

- `ollama ps` - List which models are currently loaded

### Using the `llama-cpp-python` package

> An alternative to the Ollama application is the `llama-cpp-python` package, which is a Python binding for `llama.cpp`. It gives you more control and flexibility to run the GGUF model locall, and is ideal for users who wish to integrate the local model in their workflows and Python applications.

Author: ```suggestion
An alternative to the Ollama application is the `llama-cpp-python` package, which is a Python binding for `llama.cpp`. It gives you more control and flexibility to run the GGUF model locally, and is ideal for users who wish to integrate the local model in their workflows and Python applications.
```

> An alternative to the Ollama application is the `llama-cpp-python` package. It is a Python binding for `llama.cpp`. It gives you more control and flexibility to run the GGUF model locally. It’s ideal for users who wish to integrate the local model in their workflows and Python applications.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
An alternative to the Ollama application is the `llama-cpp-python` package, which is a Python binding for `llama.cpp`. It gives you more control and flexibility to run the GGUF model locall, and is ideal for users who wish to integrate the local model in their workflows and Python applications.
```

> 1. Install `llama-cpp-python`: https://pypi.org/project/llama-cpp-python/
> 1. Interact with the model from within your application using `llama_cpp` e.g.,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Install [`llama-cpp-python`](https://pypi.org/project/llama-cpp-python/)
1. Interact with the model from within your application using `llama_cpp`. For example:
```

```python
from llama_cpp import Llama

model_path = <PATH-TO-GGUF-FILE>

model = Llama(
        model_path, 
        seed=17, 
        n_ctx=10000,
        n_gpu_layers=37, # to offload in gpu, but put 0 if all in cpu
    )

input = 'Generate a quantum circuit with 2 qubits'
raw_pred = model(input)["choices"][0]["text"]
```

> You can also add generate parameters to the model to customize the inference:

Author: ```suggestion
You can also add text generation parameters to the model to customize the inference:
```

> You can also add generate parameters to the model to customize the inference:

Reviewer 2: Is "add generate parameters" an ok phrase or is it a typo?

Author: i updated to
```
You can also add text generation parameters to the model to customize the inference:
```
let me know if that is better?

```python
generation_kwargs = {
        "max_tokens": 512,
        "echo": False, # Echo the prompt in the output
        "top_k": 1
    }

raw_pred = model(input, **generation_kwargs)["choices"][0]["text"]
```

### Use the Qiskit Code Assistant extensions

> The VS Code extension and JupyterLab extension for the Qiskit Code Assistant can be used to prompt the locally deployed `granite-8b-qiskit` GGUF model. Once you have the Ollama application [up and running with the model](#using-the-ollama-application) you can configure the extensions to connect to the local service.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Use the VS Code extension and JupyterLab extension for the Qiskit Code Assistant to prompt the locally deployed `granite-8b-qiskit` GGUF model. Once you have the Ollama application [set up with the model](#using-the-ollama-application), you can configure the extensions to connect to the local service.
```

#### Connect with the Qiskit Code Assistant VS Code extension

Using the Qiskit Code Assistant VS Code extension allows you to interact with the model and perform code completion while writing your code. This can work well for users looking for assistance writing Qiskit code for their Python applications.

> 1. Install the [Qiskit Code Assistant VS Code extension](/guides/qiskit-code-assistant-vscode)
> 1. In VS Code, go to the **User Settings** and set the **Qiskit Code Assistant: Url** to the URL of your local Ollama deployment (i.e., http://localhost:11434)
> 1. Reload VS Code, by going to **View > Command Pallette...** and selecting **Developer: Reload Window**

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Install the [Qiskit Code Assistant VS Code extension](/guides/qiskit-code-assistant-vscode).
1. In VS Code, go to the **User Settings** and set the **Qiskit Code Assistant: Url** to the URL of your local Ollama deployment (for example, http://localhost:11434).
1. Reload VS Code by going to **View > Command Pallette...** and selecting **Developer: Reload Window**.
```

> The `granite-8b-qiskit` configured in Ollama should appear in the status bar and ready to use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The `granite-8b-qiskit` configured in Ollama should appear in the status bar and is then ready to use.
```

> #### Connect with Qiskit Code Assistant JupyterLab extension

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Connect with the Qiskit Code Assistant JupyterLab extension
```

> Using the Qiskit Code Assistant JupyterLab extension allows you to interact with the model and perform code completion directly in your Jupyter Notebook. Users who predominantly work with Jupyter Notebooks can take advantage of this extension to further enhance their experience writing Qiskit code.
> 
> 1. Install the [Qiskit Code Assistant JupyterLab extension](/guides/qiskit-code-assistant-jupyterlab)
> 1. In JupyterLab, go to the **Settings Editor** and set the **Qiskit Code Assistant Service API** to the URL of your local Ollama deployment (i.e., http://localhost:11434)
> 
> The `granite-8b-qiskit` configured in Ollama should appear in the status bar and ready to use.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With the Qiskit Code Assistant JupyterLab extension, you can interact with the model and perform code completion directly in your Jupyter Notebook. Users who predominantly work with Jupyter Notebooks can take advantage of this extension to further enhance their experience writing Qiskit code.

1. Install the [Qiskit Code Assistant JupyterLab extension](/guides/qiskit-code-assistant-jupyterlab).
1. In JupyterLab, go to the **Settings Editor** and set the **Qiskit Code Assistant Service API** to the URL of your local Ollama deployment (for example, http://localhost:11434).

The `granite-8b-qiskit` configured in Ollama should appear in the status bar and is then ready to use.
```

---
title: Use Qiskit Code Assistant in local mode
description: Learn how to deploy and use the Qiskit Code Assistant model locally.
---

{/* cspell:ignore ollama, gguf */}

# Use Qiskit Code Assistant in local mode

Learn how to install, configure, and use the Qiskit Code Assistant model on your local machine.

<Admonition type="note" title="Notes">

>     - This is an experimental feature available only to IBM Quantum Premium Plan users.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

the local mode is not for premium users

Author: good catch. thanks

    - Qiskit Code Assistant is in preview release status and is subject to change.
    - If you have feedback or want to contact the developer team, use the [Qiskit Slack Workspace channel](https://qiskit.enterprise.slack.com/archives/C07LYA6PL83) or the related public GitHub repositories.
</Admonition>

## Download the Qiskit Code Assistant model

> The Qiskit Code Assistant model is available in the <DefinitionTooltip definition="GGUF is a binary format that is designed for fast loading and saving of models, and for ease of reading.">GGUF file format</DefinitionTooltip> and can be downloaded from Hugging Face in one of two ways.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Qiskit Code Assistant model is available in  <DefinitionTooltip definition="GGUF is a binary format that is designed for fast loading and saving of models, and for ease of reading.">GGUF file format</DefinitionTooltip> and can be downloaded from the Hugging Face Hub in one of two ways.
```

<details>

<summary>Download from the Hugging Face website</summary>

Follow these steps to download the Qiskit Code Assistant GGUF model from the Hugging Face website:

> 1. Navigate to the IBM granite model page: https://huggingface.co/ibm-granite

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to the `granite-8b-qiskit` model page: https://huggingface.co/qiskit
```

1. Select the Granite Qiskit code assistant GGUF model
1. Go to the Files and Versions tab and download the GGUF model

</details>

<details>

<summary>Download using the Hugging Face CLI</summary>

To download the Qiskit Code Assistant GGUF model using the Hugging Face CLI follow these steps:

1. Install the Hugging Face CLI: https://huggingface.co/docs/huggingface_hub/main/en/guides/cli
1. Login to your Hugging Face account

    ```
    huggingface-cli login
    ```

> 1. Download the Qiskit Code Assistant GGUF model

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Download the `granite-8b-qiskit` GGUF model
```
